---
category: info
info_order: 4
date: 2017-06-28 15:00 -07:00
title: Hangman
---

```python
Word so far: .tt..
Guesses so far: ['t', 'a']
Guess a letter: e
 
Word so far: .tte.
Guesses so far: ['t', 'a', 'e']
Guess a letter: _
```

<!-- more -->

<!--
- TODO : Explain returning stuff from a function.
-->

## Lists

In almost any use of programming, dealing with an arbitrary number of things is much more interesting and useful than dealing with single pre-determined variables.
Performing some repetitive task quickly is, after all, one of the main reasons to write any code at all.
Python has a few "[sequence types](https://docs.python.org/2/library/stdtypes.html#sequence-types-str-unicode-list-tuple-bytearray-buffer-xrange)", of which the <tt>list</tt> is just one.
We'll be mostly talking about lists, since they're one of the most generally useful (least specialized) sequence types, and very commonly seen.
Python also has particularly handy syntax for dealing with lists that many other languages don't come pre-built with.

```python
>>> mascots = ['Sonic', 'Mario', 'Crash']
>>> print mascots
['Sonic', 'Mario', 'Crash']
>>> len(mascots)  # length of list (number of contained objects)
3
```

Lists are declared with square brackets.
`[` begins a list, and `]` ends it.
Each item within a list is separated by a comma `,`.
You can declare empty lists (`[]`).
Lists are also <em>heterogenous</em>, as opposed to their cousin in most statically-typed languages, arrays, which are <em>homogenous</em> (Python is a dynamically typed language).
This means you can store strings, numbers, etc. together in a single list.

```python
>>> 'Bubsy' in mascots
False
>>> 'Sonic' in mascots
True
>>> 4 in [1, 1, 2, 3, 5]
False
>>> 1 in [1, 1, 2, 3, 5]
True
```

Python provides the oft-used test <code>&lt;value&gt; in &lt;sequence&gt;</code> to test for the presence of something.
This always returns a <tt>bool</tt>ean value `True` or `False`.
These are special built-in values in Python.
Anytime you use an `if` statement or a `while` loop, ultimately it's deciding if what you're testing with it boils down to `True` or `False`.

`0`, `None`, and `False` are all false.
"Everything else" is true!
`'hello'` is `True`.
An empty list, `[]`, is `True`.
Even `'False'` (note the string-ness) is `True`.

```python
>>> 'hello' in 'hello, world'
True
>>> 'l' in 'hello'
True
```

Strings, being another sequence type (like lists), allow some of the same operations.

```python
>>> mascots = ['Sonic', 'Mario', 'Crash']
>>> len(mascots)
3
>>> len('mascots')
7
```

You can ask Python for the length (<tt>len()</tt>) of a sequence (a list, a string, and other things).
This is the number of items it contains, and doesn't care how "big" each item is individually.

---

## Returning stuff from functions

```python
>>> def exclaim(message):
...     return message + '!'
... 
>>> print exclaim('Hello')
Hello!
```

```python
>>> def is_really_big(n):
...     if n > 9000:
...         return True
...     return False
... 
>>> is_really_big(800)
False
>>> is_really_big(9001)
True
```

```python
>>> def add(x, y):
...     return x + y
... 
>>> a = 1
>>> b = 2
>>> c = add(a, b)
>>> c
3
>>> print add(4, 5)
9
>>> print add(1, 1) + add(3, 7)
12
>>> print add(add(a, 4+2) + 1, add(c, 2))  # don't do this
13
```

Excuse the out of place tangent.
Returning things from functions will be <strong><em>extremely</em></strong> useful both now and in the future.
But, I haven't worked out the best timing on when to explain how to do that just yet.

You can think of the interpreter as something that tries to simplify any given line of code down as much as possible, from the inside out.
When it sees a function call, it will take the approach of executing the function and replacing it with whatever was *returned* from that function.
Then looking at the line again.
So `print add(1, 2+3)` becomes `print add(1, 5)` which then becomes `print 6`.
This isn't *exactly* what's going on underneath, but it's close enough.

When there's a `return` statement, execution immediately leaves the function.
No further lines within the function will be executed during that call.

---

## Exercise: Getting started

```
chris@CSU:~/work/ZeroToBoto$ python assets/hangman-0.py 
Guess a letter: a
a is NOT in the word.
chris@CSU:~/work/ZeroToBoto$ python assets/hangman-0.py
Guess a letter: t
t is in the word!
```

A hangman game needs to take letter guesses from a user, and know if they're part of the word or not.
Take user input (limited to just one letter), and tell the user if that letter is in the target word or not.
If they give zero or many letters in a guess, just ignore it and ask them for a guess again.

For now, just hard-code what the target word to be guessed is.

### Hints

<ol>
{% include spoiler-hint.html major=0 minor=1
    summary="Checking the <tt>len</tt>gth of the user's input"
    details="
        Python has a handy built-in function called <a href=\"https://docs.python.org/2/library/functions.html#len\"><tt>len</tt></a> that tells you how many things are in a sequence or collection.
        Characters in a <tt>str</tt>, objects in a <tt>list</tt>, and so on.
        <code>len('abc') == 3</code>
" %}
{% include spoiler-hint.html major=0 minor=2
    summary="Is the letter in the word?"
    details="
        Remember Python's handy <code>a in b</code> check.
" %}
{% include spoiler-hint.html major=0 minor=3
    summary="Thing in other thing usage"
    details="
        That is, <code>if 'a' in 'apple':</code>.
" %}
</ol>

[The completed exercise.]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link /assets/hangman-0.py %})

---

## <tt>for..in</tt> loops, and references

```python
>>> for mascot in mascots:
...     print mascot
...     print 'foo'
...
Sonic
foo
Mario
foo
Crash
foo
>>> for letter in 'hello':
...     print letter
... 
h
e
l
l
o
```

`for <variable-name> in <sequence>:` is a way to enumerate/iterate over each item individually.
The name you give the value doesn't matter *much*.
The above could also be `for blah in mascots:` and would work the same; assuming you also changed the next line to be `print blah`.

That variable name *refers to* an object in the sequence you're walking, starting with the first one.
Every time the code in the <tt>for..in</tt> loop executes, that variable is updated to refer to the next object.

```python
>>> flavors = ['vanilla', 'chocolate', 'strawberry']
>>> for f in flavors:
...     f = 'peanut butter'
... 
>>> print flavors
['vanilla', 'chocolate', 'strawberry']
```

It's important to understand *referring to* something, versus actually being the thing itself.
In the <tt>for..in</tt> loop above, <tt>f</tt> is set to *refer to* each <tt>str</tt> object in the <tt>flavors</tt> list one at a time.
Inside the loop, setting <tt>f</tt> to the only flavor anyone could ever reasonably need, <tt>'peanut butter'</tt>, you're litterally just setting <tt>f</tt>.
That is, the variable <tt>f</tt> is being set to refer to the string <tt>'peanut butter'</tt> instead of referring to the object in the list.

The list doesn't care that you just reassigned this other variable it knows nothing about.
Then, when the loop executes again, it assigns <tt>f</tt> to refer to the next object in the list.
The <tt>'peanut butter'</tt> string is then discarded, as nothing refers to it anymore.
The loop keeps track of where it was; messing with <tt>f</tt> won't confuse it.

```python
>>> for letter in 'abc':
...     pass  # do nothing, but need code here to make a valid loop
... 
>>> letter
'c'
```

<tt>letter</tt> is updated by the <tt>for..in</tt> loop itself.
Whether or not you use it, it's getting advanced along the sequence.

*Unlike* many other languages, Python sort of "leaks" that <tt>&lt;variable-name&gt;</tt> outside of the <tt>for .. in</tt> loop, as seen in the last line of the above example.
The chosen variable name continues to exist and *refer to* the last value in the list (it's not a second copy of it).

```python
>>> for a in [1, 2]:  # visit each object (int) in a list
...     print a
... 
1
2
>>> for a in '12':  # visit each character in a str
...     print a
... 
1
2
>>> for a in ['12']:  # visit each object (str) in a list
...     print a
... 
12
>>> for a in ['12']:  # visit each object (str) in a list
...     print a
...     for b in a:  # visit each character in a str
...         print b
... 
12
1
2
```

Each type implements for itself how the <tt>for..in</tt> loop acts on it.
`for .. in <str>` behaves (sort of) differently from `for .. in <list>`.

[For loop documentation](https://wiki.python.org/moin/ForLoop)

---

## Interacting with lists

```python
>>> mascots.append('Kirby')
>>> print mascots
['Sonic', 'Mario', 'Crash', 'Kirby']
>>> 
>>> mascots = mascots + 'Wolverine'
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
TypeError: can only concatenate list (not "str") to list
>>> 
>>> mascots += 'Pikachu'
>>> print mascots
['Sonic', 'Mario', 'Crash', 'Kirby', 'P', 'i', 'k', 'a', 'c', 'h', 'u']
```

It's easy to build lists up by <tt>append</tt>ing more objects onto them.
However, you do have to make sure you use the right operation.
Many sequences support `.append()`.

`str`, as we've done in the past, lets you `+` or `+=` other `str`s onto it nicely.
Whereas adding (not appending) a `str` onto a `list` will cause each individual *thing* in the sequence to be appended to the list.
As seen above with 'Pikachu'.

The above also shows that in Python, `a = a + b` is not necessarily the same as `a += b`.
Which differs from other languages.

In general, just experiment with `+`, `+=`, `.append()`, or anything else to see how a given type or types will interact.
It's the types that drive how those operations behave.
Not the operations/operators themselves.

```python
>>> message.append('!')
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
AttributeError: 'str' object has no attribute 'append'
>>> message = message + '!'
>>> print message
Hi there!
```

Though, <tt>str</tt> is an "immutable" sequence type, while <tt>list</tt> is a "mutable" sequence type.
Literally meaning you *can't* change a <tt>str</tt>, but you *can* change a <tt>list</tt>.
Above, what *looks* like successfully adding an exclamation point to <tt>message</tt> is actually making a new <tt>str</tt>, and making the variable <tt>message</tt> refer to the new one instead of the old one; the old one is discarded.
That's a whole other topic, which you can read a little about [here](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/4677529/chart-of-mutable-versus-immutable-types).
For now, just know that you may have to play around with "foo = foo + bar" versus "foo.append(bar)" for a bit, until you get used to it.

---

## Exercise: Guessing until the word is found

```
chris@CSU:~/work/ZeroToBoto$ python assets/hangman-1.py 
Guesses so far: []
Guess a letter: a
 
Guesses so far: ['a']
Guess a letter: o
 
Guesses so far: ['a', 'o']
Guess a letter: t
 
Guesses so far: ['a', 'o', 't']
Guess a letter: e
 
Guesses so far: ['a', 'o', 't', 'e']
Guess a letter: r
 
Found!  The word was "otter"
  Discovered in 5 guesses.
```

Have the user keep guessing until they've tried every letter present in the target word.
Once every letter in the target word has been guessed, print the target word, the number of guesses made, and quit.

Yes, the word in progress in unhelpfully invisible.
But you hard-coded the target word, so *you* know what it is, and we just need to build up the basic functionality before niceties like making it possible for someone else to guess the word.

Note!
If a letter appears twice, you still only have to guess it once!
The order in which the guesses are made also doesn't matter!

### Hints
<ol>
<li>You'll probably want to have a function or two by the end of this exercise.</li>
{% include spoiler-hint.html major=1 minor=1
    summary="Keeping a <tt>list</tt>"
    details="
    You'll want to keep a list of the user's letter guesses.
" %}
<li>Often in programming, it makes more sense to test the <em>opposite</em> of what you're interested in, then flip the behavior of the code asking the question.</li>
<li>There's a good number of different ways to go about checking if every letter has been guessed or not.</li>
{% include spoiler-hint.html major=1 minor=2
    summary="This was my approach"
    details="
    Check if each letter in the target word has been guessed already.
    Though even just saying that, there's multiple ways to go about doing <em>that</em>.
" %}
{% include spoiler-hint.html major=1 minor=3
    summary="More detail on my approach"
    details="
    <tt>for..in</tt> the letters of the target word.
    If you find a letter that's not guessed, the player isn't done yet.
    (This is what I meant by checking the opposite of what you want to know.)
" %}
</ol>

[The completed exercise.]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link /assets/hangman-1.py %})

---

## Testing with Python's "interactive" mode

```python
chris@CSU:~/work/ZeroToBoto$ python -i assets/hangman-2.py 
>>> partial_word('hi', ['a', 'i'])
'.i'
>>> partial_word('otter', ['a', 't'])
'.tt..'
```

Passing the <tt>-i</tt> option to <tt>python</tt> tells it to enter "interactive" mode after executing your script.
This is very helpful for testing/debugging.
Try commenting-out the while-loop from before, running your script in interactive mode, and just calling your function manually with some test inputs.

```pyhon
# a list of the letter guesses made
guesses = []

'''
# keep playing until the user guesses every letter in the word
while not is_every_letter_guessed(target_word, guesses):
    print 'Guesses so far: {}'.format(guesses)
    guesses.append(get_letter_guess())
    print ''

print 'Found!  The word was "{}"'.format(target_word)
print '  Discovered in {} guesses.'.format(len(guesses))
'''
```

Python is unusual in that it doesn't have a "block comment".
The common way around this is to turn any chunk of code you want to temporarily disable into a string.
Instead of a single-quoted string (`'hello'`), you can use a triple-quoted start to the string.
This string will include all text that follows it until the next triple-quote is encountered.
Unlike the single-quoted version, this lets the string carry on through multiple lines.

---

## Exercise: Showing the partially-guessed word

```bash
chris@CSU:~/work/ZeroToBoto$ python assets/hangman-2.py 
Word so far: .....
Guesses so far: []
Guess a letter: a
 
Word so far: .....
Guesses so far: ['a']
Guess a letter: t
 
Word so far: .tt..
Guesses so far: ['a', 't']
Guess a letter: r
 
Word so far: .tt.r
Guesses so far: ['a', 't', 'r']
Guess a letter: 
```

Show the target word before each of the user's guesses, but with each letter that hasn't been guessed yet represented by a period.

### Hints

<ol>
<li>You'll <em>definitely</em> want to make another new function for this one.</li>
{% include spoiler-hint.html major=2 minor=1
    summary="That new function might look like"
    details="
    <tt>partial_word(target_word, guesses)</tt>.
    Takes the word to be guessed, a <tt>list</tt> of the user's guesses, and prints or returns the target word, partially obscured.
" %}
{% include spoiler-hint.html major=2 minor=2
    summary="Building the partially-revealed word"
    details="
    The end of the \"Interacting with lists\" section gives an example of building a string one character at a time.
	You can build the partially revealed word in other ways, but this is the most straight-forward one I thought of.
" %}
</ol>

---

## Indexing sequences (such as lists)

```python
>>> mascots = ['Sonic', 'Mario', 'Crash']
>>> len(mascots)
3
>>> mascots[0]
Sonic
>>> mascots[2]
Crash
>>> mascots[3]
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
IndexError: list index out of range
 
>>> mascots.append('Kirby')
>>> mascots[3]
Kirby
```

"Indexing" a sequence (`some_list[index]`) is how you get a single item out of it by using that item's offset from the first item (the "head" of the sequence).
So the first item is at offset/index 0, the next is 1, and so on.
This "offset from the head" is why counting in programming starts from 0 instead of 1 in most cases.
The "why" of it makes more sense when you're doing pointer-based work with a language like C++, and it will take some getting used to.
Being used to this makes it easier to move to other languages later.  Lua is the only commmon one immediately in mind that counts from 1 instead of 0 (and many programmers greatly dislike that part of it).

---

## Exercise: Using a random word

Instead of hard-coding in a single target word to be guessed, pick one out at random from a list.

```bash
chris@CSU:~/work/ZeroToBoto$ python assets/hangman-3.py 
Word so far: .....
Guesses so far: []
Guess a letter: t
 
# ... some interaction later ...
 
Found!  The word was "otter"
  Discovered in 4 guesses.
 
chris@CSU:~/work/ZeroToBoto$ python assets/hangman-3.py 
Word so far: ......
Guesses so far: []
Guess a letter: o
 
# ... some interaction later ...
 
Found!  The word was "orange"
  Discovered in 6 guesses.
```

### Hints

<ol>
<li>Use the <tt>random</tt> module we used in the last week for the guessing game.</li>
<li>Check the <tt>len</tt>gth of your list of words for your upper-bound on randomizing.</li>
<li>Be careful not to hit one of the most common programmer errors: being off by one.  Your random number may be one too high!  (As communicated to you by <code>IndexError: list index out of range</code>.)  Offset/subtract as needed.</li>
<li>Don't overthink the complexity; only the random bounds.  The last completed example and this one have only three functional lines of difference (that is, excluding comments).</li>
{% include spoiler-hint.html major=3 minor=1
    summary="The lazy way to randomly <tt>choose</tt>"
    details="
    The <tt>random</tt> module also has a function called <tt>choose</tt> that returns one element at random from a sequence.
	You should still trying doing it by using a random index (for good practice), but this is a very useful tool to be aware of as well.
" %}
</ol>

[The completed exercise.]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link /assets/hangman-3.py %})

---

## Loading data from a file

```python
>>> with open('foo.txt') as myfile:
...     for line in myfile:
...             print line
... 
otter

disambiguous

orange

synapse

toric

```

<a href="https://docs.python.org/2/library/functions.html#open"><tt>open()</tt></a> takes a path to a file, relative to the current working directory of wherever your command prompt was when you invoked Python.
It returns an object (of type `file`) that is a "handle" to that file (now "opened") on disk.

It's bad practice to not close file handles, as that can prevent the file from being freed back to the OS again.
File handles remaining open is why you sometimes can't delete files when they're "in use".
<a href="https://docs.python.org/2/reference/compound_stmts.html#the-with-statement"><tt>with</tt></a> gives us an easy way to make sure our file handle is closed.
The <a href="https://docs.python.org/2/library/stdtypes.html#bltin-file-objects"><tt>file</tt></a> type built into Python is a special one that knows to release its handle back to the OS ("close" it) when you leave the scope of the `with` statement it's associated with *by any means*.

While the file is still open, there are a number of operations you can perform on it.  You can read individual lines (`for line in myfile:`), get a <tt>list</tt> of all lines (`myfile.readlines()`), etc.
It's also possible to `open('foo.txt', 'w')` to open a file for writing instead of reading, then `myfile.write()` to it, but we won't need that here.

Note that lines in a file typically end with a line-feed (<tt>\n</tt>), or a carriage-return,line-feed (<tt>\r\n</tt>), depending on your OS (Linux versus Windows).
This is why the above example has extra blank lines (newlines) between each word printed.

---

## Exercise: Using an external source of words

Note the file with all the words must be in the current working directory of your command line!  Or you have to change your code to look elsewhere.  This is why the example below is run from <tt>~/work/ZeroToBoto/<strong>assets</strong></tt>, whereas previous examples ran from one directory up, telling Python to look in the <tt>assets</tt> directory for the script.

```bash
chris@CSU:~/work/ZeroToBoto/assets$ python hangman-complete.py 
Word so far: .....
Guesses so far: []
Guess a letter: t

Word so far: t....
Guesses so far: ['t']
Guess a letter: r

Word so far: t.r..
Guesses so far: ['t', 'r']
Guess a letter: i

Word so far: t.ri.
Guesses so far: ['t', 'r', 'i']
Guess a letter: c

Word so far: t.ric
Guesses so far: ['t', 'r', 'i', 'c']
Guess a letter: o

Found!  The word was "toric"
  Discovered in 5 guesses.
```

### Hints

<ol>
<li>The <tt>str</tt> type has a useful <code>.strip()</code> method to remove leading/trailing whitespace.</li>
<li>Make a new function; something like <code>get_random_word(dictionary_filepath)</code>.</li>
<li>Make a <tt>list</tt> of words from the file, then treat it the same as you did your hard-coded list of words to pick from in the last exercise.</li>
</ol>

[The complete hangman.]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link /assets/hangman-complete.py %})<br/>
[The dictionary.]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link /assets/hangman-dictionary.txt %})

---

## Extra credit

1. Use the `str` type's `.lower()` method to sanitize both dictionary words and user input, converting everything to lowercase.
2. Try to break your program as a user (numbers, input that's too long or short, non-English characters, ...), and then try to validate the user's input against what you found, so that input doesn't break your program.
3. Read up on, and play around with, [slicing lists](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/509211/explain-slice-notation#509295).  We didn't need that here, but it's a very useful thing to be aware of.
4. In whatever way makes the most sense to you, support guessing the whole word outright instead of always just single letters.<br/>
    If you do, also limit the number of guesses before failing to 9.

